Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this video
we're going to carry on with our investigation
of basic data structures in mathematics we're
going to be looking at lom's which are lists
order sets multi sets and sets we're just starting
to have a little bit of a preliminary discussion
about these various important different ways
of organizing mathematical objects today we'll
be talking about multi sets the third one on
our little list in particular we're going to
be looking at very precisely focused multi sets
so what we call em set and K these are K multi
sets from n is basically the elements are chosen
from the numbers 1 2 up to n and we're allowing
K objects altogether so for example we're gonna
be specially interested in M set 5 K so in other
words when n is equal to 5 and we'd be looking
at this for various values of K starting with 0
and then 1 2 & 3 and so on so multi sets are often
not exactly on math students radar but they are in
fact quite useful it's very instructive to learn a
little bit about them their study also raises some
interesting questions with regard to identity
in maths which we sort of finesse when we talk
about sets all the time when we talk about multi
sets we have to be a little bit more careful about
thinking about what does it mean for two objects
to be the same I'll just flag that as a possible
topic for further discussion all right so let's
have some fun with multi sets so a multi set is a
very simple-minded way of organizing mathematical
objects it's sort of the mathematical equivalent
of a box or perhaps a room so here is a box and
we can use that box to organize things by just
putting things inside the box then we have a
container where those things are stored for
example we might put some money inside our box
maybe two and sent pieces a 20 cent piece and
three $2 coins then we have a little box full of
money and we can shake that box around the order
of the elements changes but the essential content
of the box is unchanged and we can organize that
in our notation with these square brackets telling
us that repetitions are allowed here we just list
the elements in some order or another doesn't
matter if we rearrange things so for example this
multi set and this multi set are the same because
they have the same elements the same number of
times even though they're rearranged okay so while
set theory has of course seen an enormous interest
and is considered a sort of foundational topic
in mathematics a multi set theory is relatively
unexamined it really deserves a little bit more
press it's actually also quite fundamental and
arguably is more fundamental than set theory we'll
see a little bit of that today so to get a initial
handle on things let's list some K sets from five
so we'll look at M set five K will start with K
equals zero where we just have the empty multi
set when K equals one well there are these five
possibilities the multi set one two three four
and five when K equals two a little bit more
interesting now we're able to list these two multi
sets natural to start with 1 1 so repetitions are
allowed so we are allowed to put two ones there
and then 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 and then - 2 - 3 - 4 - 5
3 3 3 4 3 5 4 4 4 5 and 5 5 and in this case it's
relatively easy to organize them and we can count
easily how many there are and of course this multi
set 3 4 is the same as the multi set 4 3 so we
don't have to count that separately order does
not matter and then we could carry on so for K
equals 3 we could list in some fashion or another
the three multi sets from five and snatch them to
start with one one one and ultimately end up with
five five five and in this situation we can keep
going by increasing K so we can look at bigger and
bigger K multisets from five so there's a unending
sequence of possibly bigger and bigger kinds of K
sets that we can look at just from five a natural
notion associated to multi sets the notion of
size so if m is a cave multi set from n then we
say that its size is K because it has exactly K
objects inside it and we use this absolute value
kind of notation to denote size so for example if
M equals three one three three to four one that's
on M set five seven now if it's a seven multi
set from five then the size of M is seven one
two three four five six seven the multiplicity
of an element so in this kind of situation a
given element can occur more than once so it makes
sense to give some notation to denote the number
of times an element occurs and we'll use this
convention that M standing for multiplicity so
the multiplicity of a in capital M m is a multiset
is the number of times that the object a occurs as
an element of capital M so in this example here
the multiplicity in capital M of the element 3 is
3 because it occurs three times while the
multiplicity of 1 is just 2 there are two
occurrences while the multiplicity of four would
be one with a multiplicity of an element in a
multi set now there's something look at operations
with multi sets for those of you who have
studied set theory you'll know that unions and
intersections are sort of fundamental operations
with sets you might be surprised here that in this
the set situation the Union and intersection are
not really the primary operation the primary
operation is a simpler operation of addition
this is not available in set theory however it
is a fundamental kind of operation in multi set
theory so it's a big difference between set theory
and multi set theory in multi set theory we have
addition of sets and physically it corresponds
to just about the simplest thing that you can
imagine you have one box full of coins you have
another box full of coins you just put them both
in another box you just empty out all the elements
of both into a third box and that's called the sum
of the two boxes so for example the multi set 3
1 3 3 2 4 plus the multi set for 1 4 2 to get the
sum you just combine all of the elements so we
can do that just by listing the elements of the
first one after there and then just tacking on the
elements of the second repetitions don't bother us
because repetitions are allowed in our multi set
so we just add all the elements of the two multi
sets together and pretty clearly if a is a km set
from say n and B is say an LM set from n then when
we combine them we're going to get a k plus L M
set from n so a plus B is a k plus LM set from in
the addition of two multi sets of course we also
have Union and intersection as well there are also
of course important so the union of two multi sets
how does that go so here's 3 1 3 3 2 for you guys
for 1 for 2 what happens when we take the Union
well over here we have three threes so when you
get three threes over here there are no threes
in here so we're just going to end up with three
threes in the union we have 1 1 here and 1 1 here
so the max of that is 1 we're going to have 1 1
we have one two here and one two here the max of
that is a single one so there's going to be one
two and here there are one four and here there
are two floors and so in the Union wouldn't get
two fours what's the general rule the general was
given this way that the multiplicity in the Union
a union B of an element X is the maximum of the
multiplicities of X in a and in B so we count how
many times does a particular element X appear in
a how many times does it appear in B we look at
those two numbers and we take the maximum these
are natural numbers or possibly zero and so one
of them will be bigger than the other or possibly
they'll be equal in any case we take the biggest
of the two numbers and if they're equal well we
pick that number and that's how many times X will
appear in the union for the intersection we do
sort of the opposite we work with the minimum
of these two numbers so if we take the minimum
of these two sets then three occurs three times
here and zero times here so the intersection
doesn't have any threes one occurs once here
and once here the minimum of that is one so one
occurs once to occur is once here and once here
so it'll occur once in the intersection and four
occurs once here and twice here the minimum of
that is one so four occurs exactly once so this
is maybe a little bit different way of thinking
about what the union and the intersection is
I'll leave it to you to check that if you're
restricting yourself to just ordinary sets then
this does correspond to the usual definition of
a union or intersection of ordinary sets this is
an extension of this idea to multi sets crucially
using these operations of Max and min for natural
numbers plus zero and a little exercise for you
show that if you take the union of a and B and you
take the intersection of a and B and you add them
that's something we can do with multi sets then
you get the same thing as when you just add a and
B directly so if we added these two that would be
the same thing as adding the two sets originally
so we're gonna be talking about the properties
of these operations in a further video but we
have to make a little bit of a detour before we
do that I want to introduce the last notion or
the idea of a sub multi set and correspondingly
a super multi set so the idea of when one multi
set is sort of inside another we're going to adopt
somewhat non-standard notation for this inclusion
so pay particular attention to the notation so
here are two multi sets for one four and for
one for two so if you like you to think of these
as multi sets from five notice that I've written
that this multi set is the less than or equal to
this multi set what does that mean well it means
that this thing is contained within this one what
does that mean it means that for any element X of
a the multiplicity of X in a is less than or equal
to the multiplicity of X in B that's what we mean
when we say a is less than or equal to B so if
we look at four here the four has multiplicity
two over here and it has multiplicity of 2 over
here two is less than or equal to two the 1 has
multiplicity 1 here and 1 here 1 is less than or
equal to 1 the element 2 which is not actually in
here is less than well its multiplicity would be
0 which is less than or equal to 2 but we don't
actually need to worry about that because we only
need to worry that all the elements of a appear
in B least as many times as they do in a alright
so in such a case we'll say that a is a sub multi
set of B so we read a is a sub multi set of B or
if we want to emphasize the relation of B with
respect to a we will say that B is a super multi
set of a so those two are equivalent statements
a is a sub multi set of B B is a super multi set
of a and we're introducing this rather novel less
than or equal sign for the containment so we're
not using you we're using less than or equal to
you'll see that there's a good reason for that
in our next video so let's have a look at all
the multi sets which are contained inside a given
wanna sub multi sets they naturally have ordered
structure because some of the multi sets inside
are contained in other multi sets inside so if we
start with this one for one for two that here
is a picture of the various multi sets inside
here and we get a structure which itself has
some interesting natural ordered structure by
thinking about the relationships between these
various sub multi sets so here is the original
one here and it has four multi sets within it
that have 3 elements 4 1 4 4 1 2 4 4 2 & 1 4 2
now you might say well wait a minute this multi
set and this multi set are the same and that's
true but they are occurring in here in sort of
two different ways so they deserve to be counted
twice make sense for us to identify this thing
here as being these particular 3 elements and
this one as being these particular 3 outlets has
two different objects within this context so it
to be a little bit careful about our counting
here but it's a kind of a natural panting and
then the sub multi-sets slice two-for-one talking
about these two which occurs inside here and here
okay so notice that this for one is referred to
these two elements here and so this object here
has an inclusion or on line joining it to this
one here but not to this one here even though
as multisets sorry independent of where they
come from this would be some multi set of this
one so these red bonds here are not exactly the
same as our less than or equal to signs there's
something a little bit more subtle going on here
that we may have to think about all right so you
have look at the various bonds and then sort
of symmetrically there's the some multi sets
with just one element four one four to various
inclusions and then symmetrically to the original
the empty multi set which seems to fit to make
a nice symmetrical pattern so the whole thing
has some kind of symmetry with respect to this
middle line so we might think about this as some
kind of partially ordered multi said although
the actual elements here are no longer numbers
they are themselves multi sets so we've kind of
gone up one level in abstraction we're no longer
just considering multi sets whose elements
are numbers but a new kind of object which
is consisting of things which themselves are multi
sets so we're not really in a position yet to talk
about what this is but sort of we want to head
in this direction that we'll be able to consider
structures which have elements which they are
themselves structures so we have data structures
within data structures within data structures
etc this is sort of natural thing to want to do
reminiscent of the way we organize things in
a room we have a room and bookshelves inside
the room and inside the bookshelves there may be
boxes inside the boxes there may be files and so
on all right so we have a quite a rich possibility
of combining these things eventually but right now
we're just looking at these four basic kinds of
objects which are sort of our starting points we
the basic kinds of objects that we like to look
at and these were the multi sets okay so there's
more to talk about here because the algebraic
structure that we have here these various
operations is actually quite interesting and to
understand that a little bit better it's good to
take one step back and to actually think about the
natural numbers again so we are motivated to go
back to our natural numbers and have another look
at them with a view of understanding the algebra
of multi-sets a little bit more deeply that's
what we'll do next time we'll talk about the
realm of natural numbers I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening
you